A molecule is a small group of atoms (two or more) which are chemically joined together. For example, a hydrogen molecule contains two atoms of hydrogen (H2).
Monoatomic Molecule: Molecule containing only one atom is known as monoatomic molecule.
Examples: He, Ne, Ar, etc.
Diatomic Molecules: Molecules formed by the combination of two atoms are called diatomic molecules.
Examples: H_2, O_2, N_2, etc.
Triatomic Molecules: Molecules formed by the combination of three atoms are called triatomic molecules.
Example: Ozone (O_3).
Polyatomic Molecules: Molecules formed by the combination of four or more atoms are called polyatomic molecules.
Examples: P_4, S_8, etc.

A compound is a substance which contains two or more elements chemically joined together.
For example (H_2O) is a compound.

A mixture is formed when two or more pure substances mixed together in any ratio. For example air is a mixture. There are two types of mixture which are homogeneous mixture and heterogeneous mixture.

 + Diagram1 +

Homogeneous mixture: It is a mixture that is uniform in it properties throughout given samples. All solutions are example of homogeneous mixture.
For example: sugar solution.

Heterogeneous mixture: It is a mixture that consists of physically distinct parts, each with different properties.
For example: a mixture of sand and water.

Metals: Metals usually have 1 to 3 electrons in the outermost shell. Metals form cations by losing electron(s). Metals exist as solid at room temperature and pressure except mercury which is a liquid.

Non-metal: Non-metals usually have 4 to 7 electrons in the outermost shell. They form anions by gaining electron(s). They exist as solid and gas at room temperature and pressure except bromine which is a liquid.

 + Diagram2 +

Noble gases have full outermost shell of electrons (or complete outermost shell of electrons) so they are chemically inactive or unreactive.

Q: Explain why He or Ne is chemically unreactive.
A:
He = 2
Ne = 2, 8

He or Ne has full outermost shell of electrons thus it is chemically unreactive.
