b)By using gas syringes. + Diagram1 +

Two graduated gas syringes are connected at each end of hard glass tube and arrange the apparatus as shown in diagram. Excess amount of copper turnings is taken in the glass tube. 100 cm^3 dry air is taken in a gas syringe and the other one is kept empty. Copper turnings are heated and air is passed over copper by using the gas syringes until a constant volume is reached. Then stop heating and the apparatus is left to cool. After cooling the apparatus, it is seen that 79cm^3 air is left in the gas syringe. So 21cm^3 air is used up by the copper and pink/brown colour copper turns black due to the formation of copper(II) oxide. Hence 21cm^3 air is oxygen.

2Cu(s) + O_2(g) -> 2CuO(s)

Rusting

Q:What is rusting?
A: + Diagram2 +
It is the slow oxidation of iron where iron reacts with water and oxygen in air to form hydrated iron(III) oxide.
4Fe(s) + 3O_2(g) + 2xH_2O(l) -> 2Fe_2O_3*xH_2O(s)  // x is an integre

Experiment: To investigate the conditions needed for rusting.

Procedure:

1. Clean the iron nails with sand paper to remove any rust present.
2. Put the iron nails in three different test tubes as shown in the diagram.
3. Examine the appearence of iron nails after one week.

Results:

The results of the experiment are summarized in the table below:

Test Tube            Conditions            Observation
	  Is water present? Is air present?
    A           yes             no          no rusting
    B           no              yes         no rusting
    C           yes             yes        nails rusted

Conclusion:

Both oxygen (air) and water are needed for rusting to occur.

Prevention of rusting

Rust is very brittle and flaky. When steel corrodes, the rusted surgace of the metal flakes away. This produces a new surface to corrode. Eventually all of the metal will rust and flake away. There are three general methods of rust prevention, which are using a protective layer, using a sacrificial metal and using alloys.

Methods of rust prevention

Method          Where it is used                Comment
		 
		 
Painting	  Large objects like		If the paint on cars, ships and bridges is scratched
		  cars, ships, bridges, etc.	rusting will take place under the painted surface.

Oil or greasing  Tools and machine parts.     The protective film gathers dust and must be renewed.


Galvanising      Buckets, dustbins, kitchen   The metal does not rust even if the zinc layer is
(zinc-plating)   sinks, etc.			damaged.

Metal block of   Underground pipes, ships,	Magnesium and zinc corrode in preference to iron
zinc magnesium   legs of steel piers.		because they are more reactive metals.

Stainless steel  Cutlery, surgical		Stainless steel contains chromium and nickel
                 instruments.			which do not rust.



















