Diffusion: It is the movement of particles from a region of higher concentration to a region of lower concentration. A gas with low molecular mass diffuses faster than a gas with high molecular mass. For example ammonia (Mr=18) gas diffuses faster than hydrogen chloride (Mr=36.5) gas. Diffusion occurs more slowly in liquids than in gases because the particles of a liquid are more closely packed than the particles of a gas.

Effect of Temperature on the Rate of Diffusion:
Higher the temperature the faster the rate of diffusion and the slower the temperature the slower the diffusion.

 + Diagram1 + Diagram2 +

Q:Draw a labelled diagram comparing the rate of diffusion of hydrogen chloride and ammonium chloride.
A: // No idea where's the answer, it's probably one of those 'cotton tube with soaked wool at 2 ends' answers, google the question.

Distillation: It is the process of boiling a liquid and condensing the vapour. There are several types of distillation.

1. Simple Distillation
2. Fractional Distillation

Simple Distillation

We can separate the solvent from the salt solution by simple distillation.

Q:How can you separate pure water from sea water?

A: + Diagram3 +
We can separate pure water from sea water by simple distillation.

Sea water is taken in a distillation flask and arranged the apparatus as shown in the diagram. The distillation flask is heated and water boils off first because it has lower boiling point than the others. Then only the water vapour passes through the condenser and it becomes liquid which collects into a beaker (distillate).

The following precautions should be taken when carrying out distillation:

1. The thermometer should be placed at the side arm of the flask. It should not be dipped into the solution. The thermometer measures the boiling point of the solvent that is being distilled over.
2. The condenser consists of two tubes. Cold water passes through the outer tube. It enters at the bottom of the condenser and leaves from the top.
3. The condenser slopes downwards so that the pure solvent formed can run into the receiver (beaker).
4. If the distillate is volatile, the receiver can be put in a large container filled with ice. This helps to keep the temperature of the distillate low so that it remains in the liquid state.

Fractional Distillation

It is one kind of distillation process which is carried out with the help of a fractional column. Fractionating colum is attached to the distillation flask and the condenser. The fractionating column contains many glass beads which provide a large surface area for the condensation of vapour. We can separate miscible liquids by using fractional distillation.

Q:How can we separate ethanol from the mixture of water and ethanol?
A: + Diagram4 + 
We can separate ethanol from the mixture of water and ethanol by fractional distillation.

In the distillation flask:

Ethanol boils at 78째C while water boils at 100째C. During fractional distillation, a mixture of ethanol and water vapour rises up from the fractionating column.

In the fractionating column.

In the fractionating column, condensation and vapourisation both occur. As the vapours rise up from the column, the water vapour condenses and drops back into the flask. Eventually, ethanol with the lower boiling point reaches the upper part of the column and is distilled over first. At this stage, the thermometer shows a constant temperature of 78째C. When all the ethanol has distilled over, the temperature rises rapidly to 100째C. At this temperature pure water distils over.

In the condenser:

Hot ethanol vapour condenses as it is cooled by running water. The liquid ethanol formed flows down the inner tube of the condenser and into the receiver.

In the receiver:

Ethanol is collected as distillate.

In short: Mixture of water and ethanol is taken into the distillation flask and arranged the apparatus as shown in diagram. The flask is heated and ethanol boils off first because it has the lower boiling point than water then only the ethanol vapour passes through the fractionating column as well as the condenser, which becomes liquid and collects into the beaker. Water is left into the distillation flask.




