Exercises: // Didn't do em.
	a) Diagrams of dot and cross covalent bonds of N, O, CO_2, H_2O, CH_4, NH_3.

	b) By using full electronic structure:
	   Draw CO_2 diagram.

Physical properties of covalent bonds:
1.They have low melting and boiling points.
2.They do not conduct electricity
3.They are usually insoluble in water and soluble in organic solvents like hexen.

Q: Explain why carbon dioxide has low boiling point.
A: Carbon dioxide is a covalent compound and consists of molecules. It has weak forces of attractions between the molecules so less amount of energy needed to overcome weak forces of attraction.

Q: Which one has higher boiling point, carbon dioxide or water? Explain your answer.
A: Water has higher boiling point than carbon dioxide because water and carbon dioxide both consist of molecule but water has stronger intermolecular force of attraction than carbon dioxide so more amount of energy needed to overcome stronger force of attraction.

Q: Which one has higher boiling point, chlorine or bromine? Explain your answer.
A: Bromine has higher boiling point than chlorine because bromine and clorine dioxide both consist of molecule but bromine has stronger intermolecular force of attraction than clorine so more amount of energy needed to overcome stronger force of attraction.

Q: Explain why Silicon Tetrachloride does not conduct electricity.
A: Silicon Tetrachloride is a covalent compound and consists of molecules. Molecules do not carry charge thus they don't conduct electricity.

Simple covalent compounds: Compounds made from two or more different elements linked together by covalent bonding are called simple covalent compounds. HCl, CH_4, NH_3, CO_2, etc.
Properties:
  i) they have low melting and boiling points (are often gases or volatile liquids).
 ii) they are insoluble in water.
iii) they do not conduct electricity.

Giant covalent structure: They are very stable, as all the atoms are joined together by strong covalent bonds to give a three dimensional lattice, For example diamond, graphite, sand, etc.
Properties:
  i) they have a very high melting and boiling points (are solids at RTP).
 ii) they are insoluble in water.
iii) they do not conduct electricity (except graphite).
